[chore][VERSIONING.md] Add long term support policy (#11001)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector: VERSIONING.md

# Versioning and stability

The OpenTelemetry Collector SIG produces several artifacts for [a variety of audiences](CONTRIBUTING.md#target-audiences). This document describes the versioning and support policy for these artifacts. These policies are designed so that the following goal can be achieved:

**Users are provided software artifacts of value that are stable and secure.**

The policies are divided depending on the artifact's target audience. While an artifact is supported, [critical bugs](docs/release.md#bugfix-release-criteria) and security vulnerabilities MUST be addressed. The main criteria for the length of support for an artifact is how easy it is for an artifact's target audience to adapt to disruptive changes.

## End-user focused software artifacts

> End-user focused software artifacts are those that are intended to be used by [end-users](CONTRIBUTING.md#end-users) of the OpenTelemetry Collector. These artifacts include 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
End-user focused software artifacts are those that are intended for [end-users](CONTRIBUTING.md#end-users) of the OpenTelemetry Collector. These artifacts include 
```

- Binary distributions of the OpenTelemetry Collector.

> - Collector components, such as receivers, processors, and exporters.

Reviewer: Should this clarify that what is meant by components is the go module that encompass these components?

Author: Clarified in 78a6621

These artifacts are versioned according to the [semantic versioning v2.0.0](https://semver.org/) specification.

### General considerations

Binary distributions produced by the Collector SIG contain components and features with varying [levels of stability](README.md#stability-levels). We abide by the following principles to relate the Collector's version to the stability of its components and features:

* The Collector's core framework behavior MUST be stable in order for a Collector distribution to be v1.0.0 or higher.
* Users can easily understand when they are opting in to use a component or feature that is not stable.

>     * The Collector MUST provide a configuration or CLI flag to be able to opt out of using unstable components or features.

Author: I reworded this to

> The Collector MUST be configurable in a way that does not use unstable components or features.

My point is that we can have, say, alpha components, but one should be able to not use them. This is already the case today: you can not add them to the pipeline, or you can disable a feature gate that you don't want. It was not meant to say anything about what's in the binary

>     * The Collector MUST be configurable in a way that does not use unstable components or features.

Reviewer: I'm not super clear on what this sentence means, are we talking about users having the ability to build a collector with only stable components?

Author: You should be able to not use any components that are unstable (by not including them in your pipelines) and you should be able to disable feature gates that are unstable. Anything that you can't disable/opt out/not use should be stable. I am not sure how to phrase it better, I appreciate any suggestions

Reviewer 2: On second thought, “required” doesn’t sound right. So how about

The Collector MUST be configurable so that unstable components or features can be excluded, ensuring that a fully stable configuration is possible.

    * The Collector's telemetry (e.g. Collector logs) MUST provide the ability to identify usage of unstable components or features.

> ### Long term support

Reviewer 3: How will we handle supported Go versions after 1.0? When 1.24 comes out do we drop support for 1.22 in the 1.0 modules?

The OpenTelemetry Collector SIG provides long term support for stable binary distributions of the OpenTelemetry Collector and its components. The following policies apply to long term support for any major version starting on v1:

> * A binary distribution of the OpenTelemetry Collector MUST be supported for a minimum of **one year** after the release of the next major version of said distribution.

Reviewer: It would be good to have a section in this doc specifically defining what "supported" means

Reviewer: When does support for a binary end?

Author: > It would be good to have a section in this doc specifically defining what "supported" means

The intention was that this sentence above:

> [critical bugs](docs/release.md#bugfix-release-criteria) and security vulnerabilities MUST be addressed

was the definition of supported (or, at least, a minimum criteria for what supported means). We may do more than this, but that's the minimum.

> When does support for a binary end?

This was also meant to be already covered in the text by this:

> A binary distribution of the OpenTelemetry Collector MUST be supported for a minimum of **one year** after the release of the next major version of said distribution.

So, basically, we support the distro indefinitely until we release the next major version, after which we support it for one more year.

Author: @codeboten if you think we should file an issue to continue discussing this please do so!

> * Components MUST be supported for a minimum of **6 months** after the release of the next major version of said component or after the component has been marked as deprecated. If a component has been deprecated for 6 months it MAY be removed from a binary distribution of the OpenTelemetry Collector.

Author: Called out on 6f3dda2

**Users are provided software artifacts of value that are stable and secure.**

The policies are divided depending on the artifact's target audience. While an artifact is supported, [critical bugs](docs/release.md#bugfix-release-criteria) and security vulnerabilities MUST be addressed. The main criteria for the length of support for an artifact is  how easy it is for an artifact's target audience to adapt to disruptive changes.

## End-user focused software artifacts

End-user focused software artifacts are those that are intended to be used by [end-users](CONTRIBUTING.md#end-users) of the OpenTelemetry Collector. These artifacts include 
- Binary distributions of the OpenTelemetry Collector.
- Collector components.

These artifacts are versioned according to the [semantic versioning v2.0.0](https://semver.org/) specification.

### General considerations

Binary distributions produced by the Collector SIG contain components and features with varying [levels of stability](README.md#stability-levels). We abide by the following principles to relate the Collector's version to the stability of its components and features:

> * The Collector's core framework MUST be stable in order for a Collector distribution to be v1.0.0 or higher.

Reviewer 4: Do we have the scope of the core framework defined anywhere? Is this just describing the core framework packages used by the components within the distribution?

Author: We have not previously defined it and I am not sure how to best write it. By core framework I mean anything that is not a component that you can plug (so e.g. configuration resolution, service behavior, CLI flags...). Put it another way, the common parts of all OCB builds

* Users can easily understand when they are opting in to use a component or feature that is not stable.
    * The Collector MUST provide a configuration or CLI flag to be able to opt out of using unstable components or features.
    * The Collector's telemetry (e.g. Collector logs) MUST provide the ability to identify usage of unstable components or features.

### Long term support

The OpenTelemetry Collector SIG provides long term support for binary distributions of the OpenTelemetry Collector and its components. The following policies apply to long term support for any major version starting on v1:

* A binary distribution of the OpenTelemetry Collector MUST be supported for a minimum of **one year** after the release of the next major version of said distribution.
* Components MUST be supported for a minimum of **6 months** after the release of the next major version of said component or after the component has been marked as deprecated.

> * Components MAY be removed from a binary distribution of the OpenTelemetry Collector after the component has been marked as deprecated for a minimum of **6 months**.

Reviewer 4: Just to be clear, this is elaborating on the previous point and describes a stable version of a component being removed from a distribution with a beta version?

Author: I merged it into a single point. The intent is to say that we can remove components from v1 distros, provided we have deprecated the components before

# Versioning and stability

The OpenTelemetry Collector SIG produces several artifacts for [a variety of audiences](CONTRIBUTING.md#target-audiences). This document describes the versioning and support policy for these artifacts. These policies are designed so that the following goal can be achieved:

**Users are provided software artifacts of value that are stable and secure.**

The policies are divided depending on the artifact's target audience. While an artifact is supported, [critical bugs](docs/release.md#bugfix-release-criteria) and security vulnerabilities MUST be addressed. The main criteria for the length of support for an artifact is how easy it is for an artifact's target audience to adapt to disruptive changes.

These policies reflect the current consensus of the OpenTelemetry Collector SIG. They are subject to change as the project evolves.

## Software artifacts for end users

Software artifacts intended for [end users](CONTRIBUTING.md#end-users) of the OpenTelemetry Collector include 
- Binary distributions of the OpenTelemetry Collector.

> - Go modules that expose Collector components, such as receivers, processors, connectors, extensions and exporters. 

Reviewer 5: This mentions Go modules for components. What about all other Go modules published by the project, like e.g. https://pkg.go.dev/go.opentelemetry.io/collector/otelcol or https://pkg.go.dev/go.opentelemetry.io/collector/config/confighttp? Do they get a different treatment than the Go modules for components?

Author: Yes, they have a smaller support window https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/8205489835974f8599e3553e03819ad8a0b6a5db/VERSIONING.md?plain=1#L173 

The rationale for this is that they are equipped to deal with more disruptive changes https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/012cf862283a1af411c5b1ace844a6c1d7a82766/CONTRIBUTING.md?plain=1#L45-L46

    * Contrib modules will be kept up to date with this project's releases.
* GitHub releases will be made for all releases.
* Go modules will be made available at Go package mirrors.

> ### Long term support

Reviewer 6: I feel like this needs a "after v1" remark.

Author: Clarified, thanks!

> ### Long term support after v1

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Long-term support after v1
```

> The OpenTelemetry Collector SIG provides long term support for stable Go modules. Support for modules depend on the module's [target audiences](CONTRIBUTING.md#target-audiences). The following policies apply to long term support for any major version starting on v1:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The OpenTelemetry Collector SIG provides long-term support for stable Go modules. Support for modules depend on the module's [target audiences](CONTRIBUTING.md#target-audiences). The following policies apply to long-term support for any major version starting on v1:
```

- Modules intended for **component developers** MUST be supported for a minimum of **1 year** after the release of the next major version of said module or after the module has been marked as deprecated.

> - Modules intended for **Collector library users** MUST be supported for a minimum of **6 months** after the release of the next major version of said module or after the module has been marked as deprecated.

Author: I feel the other way :smile: at least for modules intended for component developers. We can't have an ecosystem of components outside of contrib if we don't guarantee that the APIs used to build components are stable and available for a long time. Originally I was going to write 2-3 years for component developers, I went with this to start with something a bit more conservative

For the ones meant for library users, I guess 3 months may be fine now because every major user in that audience (vendors and Jaeger) is involved with the Collector

> - Modules intended for **Collector library users** MUST be supported for a minimum of **6 months** after the release of the next major version of said module or after the module has been marked as deprecated.

Reviewer 3: Well I definitely don't want to support the APIs for 3 years, so I can live with 1.
